== Learn RISC-V

A community-driven compilation of RISC-V resources and learning
material. The list is dynamically updated by the community and
categorized based on different contexts of the RISC-V scope, taking also
into account different levels of experience/knowledge, allowing anyone
interested in RISC-V to discover RISC-V resources and relevant content
(courses, software, documentation, articles etc.) in an organized
fashion. Feel free to navigate through the resources listed below with
their descriptions.

*RISC-V* is an open standard Instruction Set Architecture (ISA) based on
established Reduced Instruction Set Computer (RISC) principles.

ðŸ‘‹ *Want to learn about RISC-V?* Check out the
link:#beginner-level-resources[Beginner-Level] or
link:#intermediate-level-resources[Intermediate-Level] learning
resources.

* link:#-making-contributions[âž• Making Contributions]
* link:#-resources[ðŸ“™ Resources]
** link:#learning-resources-for-risc-v[Learning Resources for RISC-V]
*** link:#beginner-level-resources[Beginner-level]
*** link:#intermediate-level-resources[Intermediate-level]
*** link:#softwares-and-tools[Softwares and Tools]
*** link:#open-risc-v-implementations[Open RISC-V Implementations]
** link:#relevant-documentation-from-risc-v-international[Relevant
Documentation from RISC-V International]
** link:#articles-and-presentations[Articles and presentations]

=== âž• Making Contributions

We love contributions! Thank you for your interest in contributing to
our compilation of tutorial resources for RISC-V.

Contributing is easy, here are some steps to help get you started:

âœ” Browse through the list of beginner and intermediate-level resources
link:#learning-pathways-for-risc-v[here] to see if your resource is
already included.

âœ” If not, go to https://github.com/riscv/learn/issues[Issues], click on
`New issue` and select the template for adding a new RISC-V tutorial
resource.

âœ” Enter the resource information in the fields provided and click
`Submit new issue`.

âœ” If you have a different contribution, you can select the General
Request issue template from the provided issue types.

âœ” You could also engage with an already open issue.

We may interact with you before adding your contributions.

=== ðŸ“™ Resources

==== Learning Resources for RISC-V

===== Beginner-level resources

For those with little or no knowledge of digital logic design. After
studying the link:#digital-design[*Digital Design*] book in this
section, you could jump to the intermediate-level
link:#computer-architecture-rvfpga[*edx RVfpga*] course if you wish as
it expands on concepts discussed in the book.

[width="100%",cols="20%,20%,20%,20%,20%",options="header",]
|===
|Resource |Author(s) |Description |Access |Date added
|[#digital-design]#*Digital Design and Computer Architecture RISC-V
edition*# (good starting point) |Sarah L. Harris, David M. Harris
|Covers the foundational knowledge of digital logic design and segues
smoothly into RISC-V Processor implementation. Topics covered here
include : _Number systems and digital representation, Semiconductors and
transistors, Logic Gates and Digital Design, C Programming, RISC-V
Architecture, RISC-V Assembly, Memory systems, Embedded I/O systems_
|https://www.amazon.com/Digital-Design-Computer-Architecture-RISC-V/dp/0128200642/ref=sr_1_5?crid=1Y6VGCXHTB99I&keywords=digital+design+and+computer+architecture&qid=1659609065&sprefix=digital+design+and+computer+architecture%2Caps%2C135&sr=8-5[Amazon book link] |

|*Nand2Tetris* (optional) |Noam Nisan, Shimon Schocken |A free hands-on
tutorial on building a general-purpose computer from logic gates using a
hardware simulator. Taking this course is optional. |https://www.nand2tetris.org/[webpage] |

|[#bruno-levy-episode-1]#*learn-FPGA episode I: from blinky to RISC-V*#
|https://github.com/BrunoLevy[BrunoLevy] |A beginnerâ€™s introduction to
digital design of a RISC-V softcore on FPGAs. Episode I gently starts
from a very basic blinker in VERILOG and morphs it step by step into a
basic yet fully functional RISC-V SOC. It is also explained how to write
programs in C and assembly for the SOC. _(Required background: Basic
knowledge of VERILOG)_ |https://github.com/BrunoLevy/learn-fpga/blob/master/FemtoRV/TUTORIALS/FROM_BLINKER_TO_RISCV/README.md[GitHub] |
|===

===== Intermediate-Level resources

A collection of more advanced learning resources for RISC-V

[width="100%",cols="20%,20%,20%,20%,20%",options="header",]
|===
|Resource |Author(s) |Description |Access |Date added
|[#hardware-software-interface]#*Computer Organization and Design RISC-V
edition: The Hardware Software Interface (2nd edition)*# (good starting
point) |David A. Patterson, John L. Hennesy |Covers the RISC-V
Instruction Set in general and does an in-depth examination of the core
RISC-V instructions. It also does a deep dive into RISC-V processor
implementations. Each chapter includes real-world applications by tying
concepts discussed with available modern computers. The book also
highlights the interactions between hardware and software by
continuously optimizing a sample software program based on the new
hardware concepts introduced in each chapter._(Required background:
knowledge of Logic design is needed to follow the contents of this
book)_ |https://www.amazon.com/Computer-Organization-Design-RISC-V-Architecture/dp/0128203315[Amazon book link] |

|[#computer-architecture-rvfpga]#*Computer Architecture with an
Industrial RISC-V Core [RVfpga]*# |Sarah Harris, Daniel Chaver-Martinez
|This free EdX course expands on topics covered in *Digital Design and
Computer Architecture, RISC-V edition* with hands-on learning. This
course shows how to target a commercial RISC-V Core and RISC-V
system-on-chip (SoC) to FPGA, program the RISC-V SoC, and add more
functionalities to the RISC-V SoC |https://www.edx.org/learn/computer-programming/the-linux-foundation-computer-architecture-with-an-industrial-risc-v-core[Edx course link] |

|*learn-FPGA episode II: pipelining*
|https://github.com/BrunoLevy[BrunoLevy] |This tutorial explains how to
transform the basic softcore from link:#bruno-levy-episode-1[episode I]
into an efficient pipelined processor. The tutorial follows a
step-by-step approach, starting from a 5-states processor, transforming
the states into stages, and solving data and control hazards by first
observing what happens in real programs thanks to the included
debugger/disassembler. Then it is explained how to gain more performance
using register forwarding. Finally, branch prediction is introduced,
from the simplest static branch prediction to more elaborate ones
(gshare). The effect of the different optimizations are demonstrated
using different codes (the classical dhrystones and coremark benchmarks,
and a program that computes an image using raytracing)._(Required
background: It is highly recommended to read
link:#bruno-levy-episode-1[episode I] before episode II !)_ |https://github.com/BrunoLevy/learn-fpga/blob/master/FemtoRV/TUTORIALS/FROM_BLINKER_TO_RISCV/PIPELINE.md[GitHub] |

|*Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach(6th edition)* |David A.
Patterson, John L. Hennesy |Covers advanced computer architecture
concepts pertaining to high performance computing principles and domain
specific architectures along with examples and exercises pertaining to
the RISC-V ISA-(6th Edition onwards). This is a step-up from the first
book,(Hardware-Software Interface), with advanced concepts like
Instruction , Data and Thread Level Parallelism along with introduction
to Vector, SIMD and GPU architectures.It also continues the tradition of
using real-world examples to demonstrate the concepts, by introducing
memory organizations and architectures of ARM Cortex A8, Intel Core i7,
Nvidia GTX-280 GPUs and so on._(Required Background: It is recommended
that you first read the link:#hardware-software-interface[Hardware
Software Interface] before this book !)_ |https://a.co/d/fuvp97D[Amazon book link] |

|*Tutorial: RISC-V Vector Extension Demystified* |Thang Tran |A very
in-depth, three hour long video introduction to the RISC-V Vector
extension. |https://youtu.be/oTaOd8qr53U[Youtube video] |
|===

===== Softwares and Tools

A collection of tools that can be used along with the beginner or
intermediate-level learning resources for a better understanding or
visualization of the RISC-V ISA

[width="100%",cols="25%,25%,25%,25%",options="header",]
|===
|Resource |Description |Access |Date added
|*emulsiV* |emulsiV is a visual simulator for a simple RISC processor
called Virgule. Virgule is a 32-bit RISC processor core that implements
a minimal subset of the RISC-V instruction set. Here, ``minimal'' means
that Virgule accepts only the instructions that a C compiler would
generate from a pure stand-alone C program. |https://eseo-tech.github.io/emulsiV/[website] |20-12-2023

|*RISC-V Instruction Encoder/Decoder* |This tool is an online
encoder/decoder for RISC-V instructions. Users can input RISC-V
instructions in their assembly or binary format and get the full
conversion from one to the other. |https://luplab.gitlab.io/rvcodecjs/[website] |20-12-2023

|*CREATOR* |CREATOR is a didactic simulator that allows the development,
simulation, and debugging of RISC-V (RV32IMFD) assembly programs
intuitively and interactively. It is a web application, so it can be
used on any type of device (desktop, tablet, smartphone, etc.) without
installing additional software. Only a modern web browser (Google
Chrome, Mozilla Firefox, Apple Safari, etc.) is required. |https://creatorsim.github.io/creator/[website]
|20-12-2023

|*QtRvSim* - RISC-V CPU Simulator with Cache and Pipeline Visualization
|QtRvSim is educational simulator with pipeline and cache visualization
(RV32IMA/RV64IMA). It supports even M-mode ecalls, ACLINT MTIMER, MSWI,
SSWI, related CSR registers, serial port Rx and Tx interrupts and more.
|https://github.com/cvut/qtrvsim/[Github] |20-12-2023

|*RVV intrinsics viewer* |A third party documentation website for the
vector extension intrinsics, currently including pretty much all
intrinsics variations, and fuzzy search. This can be a useful resource
when writing rvv code. |https://dzaima.github.io/intrinsics-viewer/[website] |20-12-2023
|===

===== Open RISC-V Implementations

A list of all open RISC-V Implementations

[width="100%",cols="25%,25%,25%,25%",options="header",]
|===
|Name |Description |Access |Date added
|*Pequeno* |Pequeno aka pqr5 is a pipelined in-order RISC-V CPU Core
compliant with RV32I |https://github.com/iammituraj/pequeno_riscv[Github] |20-12-2023
|===

==== Relevant Documentation from RISC-V International

[width="100%",cols="34%,33%,33%",options="header",]
|===
|Resource |Description |Access
|*Member Benefits and Welcome deck* |A set of slides useful for new
RISC-V members to familiarize themselves with the scope/organization of
the RISC-V community and learn about membership benefits, as well as how
to integrate into the community as a member. |https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1Q8gMcVwzqdqym3ugl_Q-LW0KMUApO-v8mWVdjqQE-MI/edit#slide=id.gf097992cc3_0_1819[Google Doc]

|*Getting Started Guide for RISC-V Members* |This document is intended
to give a memberâ€™s overview of the RISC-V technical organizations. The
intended audience is both for new members as well as a reference for
existing members. |https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Qjf6BwMmtqTfzftr3WWf2bRv8Cl4f0qZrWWbr0jCBSU/edit[Google Doc]

|*RISC-V Technical Wiki* |This page serves as the main anchor point for
the most important pieces of technical information for RISC-V. If youâ€™re
looking for something technical, start here. |https://wiki.riscv.org[webpage]

|*RISC-V Lifecycle Guide* |This document has been created to facilitate
RISC-V member participation in the key activities involved in creating
and running groups, writing of specifications, and contributing
open-source software in support of RISC-V architectures. It is a guide,
not the rules. |https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Au3veNdNJQKPq-oiQRKTzdgmM72FDaqZOKeH7sOnG04/[Google Doc]

|*RISC-V Repository Map* |A central point that directs to different
repositories relevant to the RISC-V ecosystem. It includes the technical
and non-technical, ISA and non-ISA related, software related, as well as
collaboration related repositories for RISC-V available on Github.
|https://wiki.riscv.org/display/HOME/GitHub+Repo+Map[webpage]
|===

==== Articles and presentations

[width="100%",cols="25%,25%,25%,25%",options="header",]
|===
|Resource |Author(s) |Description |Access
|*Design of the RISC-V Instruction Set Architecture* |Andrew Waterman
|Andrew Watermanâ€™s Doctorate of Philosophy dissertation in the
University of California, Berkeley, about the RISC-V ISA. It covers how
RISC-V is a well structured small base ISA with a variety of optional
extensions, making RISC-V convenient for a range of purposes from
research and education, low-power embedded devices, to more
general-purpose, high-performance computing, with the existence of these
optional extensions. It provides a comparison of RISC-V to other popular
ISAs as well. |https://www2.eecs.berkeley.edu/Pubs/TechRpts/2016/EECS-2016-1.pdf[pdf]

|*Past, Present and Future of RISC-V* |Krste AsanoviÄ‡ | |https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RrVRMFjYti0[YouTube video]

|*Is RISC-V the Future* |Roddy Urquhart | |https://semiengineering.com/is-risc-v-the-future[webpage]
|===
